# Big Data A Revolution That Will Transform How We Live Work and Think
- There was a shift in mindset about how data could be used. Data was no longer regarded as static or stale, whose usefulness was finished once the purpose for which it was collected was achieved, such as after the plane landed (or in Google's case, once a search query had been processed). Rather, data became a raw material of business, a vital economic input, used to create a new form of economic value. In fact, with the right mindset, data can be cleverly reused to become a fountain of innovation and new services. The data can reveal secrets to those with the humility, the willingness, and the tools to listen.
- Most strikingly, society will need to shed some of its obsession for causality in exchange for simple correlations: not knowing why but only what.
- Meanwhile, the 800 million monthly users of Google's YouTube service upload over an hour of video every second. The number of messages on Twitter grows at around 200 percent a year and by 2012 had exceeded 400 million tweets a day.
- information in the world is estimated to be around 1,200 exabytes, of which less than 2 percent is non-digital.
- quantitative change has produced a qualitative change
- the systems are built to improve themselves over time, by keeping a tab on what are the best signals and patterns to look for as more data is fed in.
- What we lose in accuracy at the micro level we gain in insight at the macro level.
- In a big-data world, by contrast, we won't have to be fixated on causality; instead we can discover patterns and correlations in the data that offer us novel and invaluable insights. The correlations may not tell us precisely why something is happening, but they alert us that it is happening.
- It leads to an ethical consideration of the role of free will versus the dictatorship of data.
- The first is the ability to analyze vast amounts of data about a topic rather than be forced to settle for smaller sets. The second is a willingness to embrace data's real-world messiness rather than privilege exactitude. The third is a growing respect for correlations rather than a continuing quest for elusive causality
- purview
- -fulfilling.
- winnowed
- Statisticians have shown that sampling precision improves most dramatically with randomness, not with increased sample size.
- Why this should be the case is complicated mathematically, but the short answer is that after a certain point early on, as the numbers get bigger and bigger, the marginal amount of new information we learn from each observation is less and less.
- conundrum.
- One of the areas that is being most dramatically shaken up by n = all is the social sciences. They have lost their monopoly on making sense of empirical social data, as big-data analysis replaces the highly skilled survey specialists of the past. The social science disciplines largely relied on sampling studies and questionnaires. But when the data is collected passively while people do what they normally do anyway, the old biases associated with sampling and questionnaires disappear. We can now collect information that we couldn't before, be it relationships revealed via mobile phone calls or sentiments unveiled through tweets. More important, the need to sample disappears.
- We tend to think of statistical sampling as some sort of immutable bedrock, like the principles of geometry or the laws of gravity. But the concept is less than a century old, and it was developed to solve a particular problem at a particular moment in time under specific technological constraints.
- There are several kinds of messiness to contend with. The term can refer to the simple fact that the likelihood of errors increases as you add more data points. Hence, increasing the stress readings from a bridge by a factor of a thousand boosts the chance that some may be wrong. But you can also increase messiness by combining different types of information from different sources, which don't always align perfectly.
- Of course the data can't be completely incorrect, but we're willing to sacrifice a bit of accuracy in return for knowing the general trend. Big data transforms figures into something more probabilistic than precise.
- Many of the gains to society from big data, however, happen not so much because of faster chips or better algorithms but because there is more data.
- "Simple models and a lot of data trump more elaborate models based on less data," wrote Google's artificial-intelligence guru Peter Norvig and colleagues in a paper entitled "The Unreasonable Effectiveness of Data."
- Though it may seem counterintuitive at first, treating data as something imperfect and imprecise lets us make superior forecasts, and thus understand our world better.
- Hadoop's output isn't as precise as that of relational databases: it can't be trusted to launch a spaceship or to certify bank-account details. But for many less critical tasks, where an ultra-precise answer isn't needed, it does the trick far faster than the alternatives
- In return for living with messiness, we get tremendously valuable services that would be impossible at their scope and scale with traditional methods and tools. According to some estimates only 5 percent of all digital data is "structured"--that is, in a form that fits neatly into a traditional database.
- we may tolerate blurriness and ambiguity in areas where we used to demand clarity and certainty, even if it had been a false clarity and an imperfect certainty.
- And we may tolerate blurriness and ambiguity in areas where we used to demand clarity and certainty, even if it had been a false clarity and an imperfect certainty. We may accept this provided that in return we get a more complete sense of reality--the equivalent of an impressionist painting, wherein each stroke is messy when examined up close, but by stepping back one can see a majestic picture.
- The computer may not have known why a customer who read Ernest Hemingway might also like to buy F. Scott Fitzgerald. But that didn't seem to matter. The cash register was ringing.
- Amazon's innovative recommendation systems teased out valuable correlations without knowing the underlying causes. Knowing what, not why, is good enough.
- Admittedly, chilling people's freedom to interact with information would be terrible. On the other hand, the benefit is that making insurance easier and less expensive to obtain may result in more insured people, which is a good thing for society, not to mention for insurance firms.
- One of these is a method called predictive analytics, which is starting to be widely used in business to foresee events before they happen.
- Note that predictive analytics may not explain the cause of a problem; it only indicates that a problem exists. It will alert you that an engine is overheating, but it may not tell you whether the overheating is due to a frayed fan belt or a poorly screwed cap. The correlations show what, not why, but as we have seen, knowing what is often good enough.
- small-data world, because so little data tended to be available, both causal investigations and correlation analysis began with a hypothesis, which was then tested to be either falsified or verified. But because both methods required a hypothesis to start with, both were equally susceptible to prejudice and erroneous intuition. And the necessary data often was not available. Today, with so much data around and more to come, such hypotheses are no longer crucial for correlational analysis.
- Before big data, partly because of inadequate computing power, most correlational analysis using large data sets was limited to looking for linear relationships. In reality, of course, many relationships are far more complex. With more sophisticated analyses, we can identify non-linear relationships among data.
- Daniel Kahneman, a professor of psychology at Princeton and the recipient of the 2002 Nobel Prize in economics, uses this example to suggest that we have two modes of thinking. One is fast and takes little effort, letting us jump to conclusions in seconds. The other is slow and hard, requiring us to think through a particular issue.
- Just as sampling was a shortcut we used because we could not process all the data, the perception of causality is a shortcut our brain uses to avoid thinking hard and slow.
- Correlations exist; we can show them mathematically. We can't easily do the same for causal links.
- To achieve this, however, we needed to change the way we operated. We had to use all the data, as much as we could possibly collect, not just a small portion. We needed to accept messiness rather than treat exactitude as a central priority. And we had to put our trust in correlations without fully knowing the causal basis for the predictions.
- Big data may not spell the "end of theory," but it does fundamentally transform the way we make sense of the world. This change will take a lot of getting used to. It challenges many institutions. Yet the tremendous value that it unleashes will make it not only a worthwhile tradeoff, but an inevitable one.
- The word "data" means "given" in Latin, in the sense of a "fact." It became the title of a classic work by Euclid, in which he explains geometry from what is known or can be shown to be known. Today data refers to a description of something that allows it to be recorded, analyzed, and reorganized.
- Modern IT systems certainly make big data possible, but at its core the move to big data is a continuation of humankind's ancient quest to measure, record, and analyze the world. The IT revolution is evident all around us, but the emphasis has mostly been on the T, the technology. It is time to recast our gaze to focus on the I, the information.
- It is the basis of the Arabic numerals we use today.
- You can try it yourself. Google's Ngram Viewer (http://books.google.com/ngrams) will generate a graph of the use of words or phrases over time, using the entire Google Books index as a data source
- "Culturomics": computational lexicology that tries to understand human behavior and cultural trends through the quantitative analysis of texts.
- Many companies are now vying to crack the e-book market. Amazon, with its Kindle e-book readers, seems to have a big early lead. But this is an area where Amazon's and Google's strategies differ greatly.
- Amazon has done for millions of new books what Google is painstakingly trying to achieve for many older ones.
- Perhaps it is not unjust to say that, at least for now, Amazon understands the value of digitizing content, while Google understands the value of datafying it.
- "Prediction gave us knowledge," says Levis at UPS. "But after knowledge is something more: wisdom and clairvoyance. At some point in time, the system will be so smart that it will predict problems and correct them before the user realizes that there was something wrong."
- Two hedge funds, Derwent Capital in London and MarketPsych in California, started analyzing the datafied text of tweets as signals for investments in the stock market.
- Twitter has struck deals with two firms, DataSift and Gnip,
- MarketPsych's case, it teamed up with Thomson Reuters to offer no fewer than 18,864 separate indices across 119 countries, updated each minute, on emotional states like optimism, gloom, joy, fear, anger, and even themes like innovation, litigation, and conflict.
- metadata is extremely interesting, such as users' language, their geo-location, and the number and names of people they follow and those who follow them.
- Facebook, Twitter, LinkedIn, Foursquare, and others sit on an enormous treasure chest of datafied information that, once analyzed, will shed light on social dynamics at all levels, from the individual to society at large.
- slew of startups let people track their sleep patterns by measuring brainwaves throughout the night. One firm, Zeo, has already created the world's largest database of sleep activity and uncovered differences in the amounts of REM sleep experienced by men and women.
- In 2009 Apple was granted a patent for collecting data on blood oxygenation, heart rate, and body temperature through its audio earbuds.
- Once the world has been datafied, the potential uses of the information are basically limited only by one's ingenuity
- Today we have the tools (statistics and algorithms) and the necessary equipment (digital processors and storage) to perform similar tasks much faster, at scale, and in many different contexts. In the age of big data, even backsides have upsides.
- datafication represents an essential enrichment in human comprehension.
- With the help of big data, we will no longer regard our world as a string of happenings that we explain as natural or social phenomena, but as a universe comprised essentially of information.
- Seeing the world as information, as oceans of data that can be explored at ever greater breadth and depth, offers us a perspective on reality that we did not have before. It is a mental outlook that may penetrate all areas of life.
- however, the most advanced users of datafication are in business, where big data is being used to create new forms of value--
- Luis von Ahn, a 22-year-old who had just graduated from college, had an idea for solving the problem: force registrants to prove they are human. So he looked for something that is easy for people to do but hard for machines. He came up with the idea of presenting squiggly, hard-to-read letters during the sign-up process. People would be able to decipher them and type in the correct text in a few seconds, but computers
- The story of ReCaptcha underscores the importance of the reuse of data. With big data, the value of data is changing.
- Data's value shifts from its primary use to its potential future uses. This has profound consequences. It affects how businesses value the data they hold and who they let access it. It enables, and may force, companies to change their business models. It alters how organizations think about data and how they use
- Information has always been essential for market transactions.
- Specialized data brokers in the United States such as Acxiom, Experian, and Equifax charge handsomely for comprehensive dossiers of personal information on hundreds of millions of consumers. With
- the age of big data, all data will be regarded as valuable, in and of itself.
- Until recently there were no easy ways to collect, store, and analyze such data, which severely limited the opportunities to extract its potential value.
- The immediate value of most data is evident to those who collect it. In fact, they probably gather it with a specific purpose in mind. Stores collect sales data for proper financial accounting. Factories monitor their output to ensure it conforms to quality standards. Websites log every click users make--sometimes even where the mouse-cursor moves--for analyzing and optimizing the content the sites present to visitors.
- Information is what economists call a "non-rivalrous" good: one person's use of it does not impede another's.
- Data's true value is like an iceberg floating in the ocean. Only a tiny part of it is visible at first sight, while much of it is hidden beneath the surface. Innovative companies that understand this can extract that hidden value and reap potentially huge benefits.
- tapped. There are three potent ways to unleash data's option value: basic reuse; merging datasets; and finding "twofers."
- Even the most banal information may have special value, if applied in the right way.
- That way they are able to score the usefulness of older data, and thus model more accurate "depreciation rates" for the information.
- Data exhaust can be a huge competitive advantage for companies. It may also become a powerful barrier to entry against rivals.
- The difference between a company's book value and its market value is accounted for as "intangible assets.
- The crux of data's worth is its seemingly unlimited potential for reuse: its option value. Collecting the information is crucial but not enough, since most of data's value lies in its use, not its mere possession.
- the essence of what makes Decide.com special is the idea: the company has a "big-data mindset."
- The emphasis was on firms that collect data. Now our regard shifts to the companies that use data, and how they fit into the information value chain.
- Three types of big-data companies have cropped up, which can be differentiated by the value they offer. Think of it as the data, the skills, and the ideas.
- new profession has emerged in recent years, the "data scientist," which combines the skills of the statistician, software programmer, infographics designer, and storyteller.
- let's examine each category--data holder, data specialist, and big-data mindset--in turn.
- Today the entrepreneurs with the big-data mindset often don't have the data when they start. But because of this, they also don't have the vested interests or financial disincentives that might prevent them from unleashing their ideas.
- Today, in big data's early stages, the ideas and the skills seem to hold the greatest worth. But eventually most value will be in the data itself.
- The difference today is that the data is now raw material entering the marketplace; an asset independent of what it had previously aimed to measure.
- In the movie Moneyball, about how the Oakland A's became a winning baseball team by applying analytics and new types of metrics to the game, there is a delightful scene in which grizzled old scouts are sitting around a table discussing players.
- In his book Super Crunchers, the Yale economist and law professor Ian Ayers argued that statistical analyses force people to reconsider their instincts.
- The winners of Kaggle competitions, the online platform for big-data projects, are typically new to the sector in which they produce successful results, explains Kaggle's chief executive Anthony Goldbloom
- Mathematics and statistics, perhaps with a sprinkle of programming and network science, will be as foundational to the modern workplace as numeracy was a century ago and literacy before that.
- "We are an analytics company masquerading as a gaming company. Everything is run by the numbers," explained Ken Rudin, then Zynga's analytics chief, before jumping ship to head analytics at Facebook. Of course, harnessing data is no guarantee of business success, and Zynga's business has struggled a lot, but it shows what is possible.
- Erik Brynjolfsson, a business professor at MIT's Sloan School of Management, and his colleagues studied the performance of companies that excel at data-driven decision-making and compared it with the performance of other firms.
- As big data becomes a source of competitive advantage for many companies, the structure of entire industries will be reshaped.
- The challenge for the victors of a small-data world and for offline champions--companies like Walmart, Proctor & Gamble, GE, Nestle, and Boeing--is to appreciate the power of big data and collect and use data more strategically.
- Small firms can license the data rather than own it, run their analysis on inexpensive cloud computing platforms, and pay the licensing fees with a percentage of income earned.
- For mid-sized companies, however, big data is less helpful. There are scale advantages to the very large, and cost and innovation advantages to the small, argues Philip Evans of the Boston Consulting Group, a prescient thinker on technology and business. In traditional sectors, medium-sized firms exist because they combine a certain minimum size to reap the benefits of scale with a certain flexibility that large players lack. But in a big-data world, there is no minimum scale that a company must reach to pay for its investments in production infrastructure.
- we may not be ready for its impact on our privacy and our sense of freedom. Our perceptions and institutions were constructed for a world of information scarcity, not surfeit.
- irony that there were more than 30 surveillance cameras within 200 yards of the London apartment where George Orwell wrote 1984.
- If the Internet age threatened privacy, does big data endanger it even more? Is that the dark side of big data? Yes, and it is not the only one.
- Wielded unwisely, it can become an instrument of the powerful, who may turn it into a source of repression, either by simply frustrating customers and employees or, worse, by harming citizens.
- is tempting to extrapolate the danger to privacy from the growth in digital data and see parallels to Orwell's surveillance dystopia 1984. And yet the situation is more complex.
- The important question, however, is not whether big data increases the risk to privacy (it does), but whether it changes the character of the risk. If the threat is simply larger, then the laws and rules that protect privacy may still work in the big-data age; all we need to do is redouble our existing efforts. On the other hand, if the problem changes, we may need new solutions.
- Given enough data, perfect anonymization is impossible no matter how hard one tries.
- The NSA was already said to intercept and store 1.7 billion emails, phone calls, and other communications every day, according to a Washington Post investigation in 2010. William Binney, a former NSA official, estimates that the government has compiled "20 trillion transactions" among U.S. citizens and others--who calls whom, emails whom, wires money to whom, and so
- new thinking is that people are the sum of their social relationships, online interactions, and connections with content.
- People are imprisoned not for what they did, but for what they are foreseen to do, even though they never actually commit the crime. The movie attributes this prescient and preemptive law enforcement to the visions of three clairvoyants, not to data analysis. But the unsettling future Minority Report portrays is one that unchecked big-data analysis threatens to bring about, in which judgments of culpability are based on individualized predictions of future behavior. Already we see the seedlings of this.
- Such prediction-based punishment seems an improvement over practices we have already come to accept. Preventing unhealthy, dangerous, or risky behavior is a cornerstone of modern society.
- The very idea of penalizing based on propensities is nauseating. To accuse a person of some possible future behavior is to negate the very foundation of justice:
- Big data would have become a tool to collectivize human choice and abandon free will in our society.
- Big data erodes privacy and threatens freedom. But big data also exacerbates a very old problem: relying on the numbers when they are far more fallible than we think. Nothing underscores the consequences of data analysis gone awry more than the story of Robert McNamara.
- McNamara epitomized the mid-twentieth-century manager, the hyper-rational executive who relied on numbers rather than sentiments, and who could apply his quantitative skills to any industry he turned them to. In 1960 he was named president of Ford, a position he only held for a few weeks before President Kennedy appointed him secretary of defense.
- "In God we trust--all others bring data," is the mantra of the modern manager, heard echoing in Silicon Valley cubicles, on factory floors, and along the corridors of government agencies.
- "garbage in, garbage out." In certain cases, the reason is the quality of the underlying information. Often, though, it is the misuse of the analysis that is produced. With big data, these problems may arise
- Would Larry and Sergey, as PhD dropouts, have stood a chance of becoming managers at the legendary Bell Labs? By Google's standards, not Bill Gates, nor Mark Zuckerberg, nor Steve Jobs would have been hired, since they lack college degrees.
- Big data may lure us to commit the sin of McNamara: to become so fixated on the data, and so obsessed with the power and promise it offers, that we fail to appreciate its limitations.
- Protecting privacy requires that big-data users become more accountable for their actions. At the same time, society will have to redefine the very notion of justice to guarantee human freedom to act (and thus to be held responsible for those actions). Lastly, new institutions and professionals will need to emerge to interpret the complex algorithms that underlie big-data findings, and to advocate for people who might be harmed by big data.
- In the big-data era we will have to expand our understanding of justice, and require that it include safeguards for human agency as much as we currently protect procedural fairness. Without such safeguards the very idea of justice may be utterly undermined.
- With so much seemingly objective data available, it may seem appealing to de-emotionalize and de-individualize decision-making, to rely on algorithms rather than on subjective assessments by judges and evaluators, and to frame decisions not in the language of personal responsibility but in terms of more "objective" risks and their avoidance.
- The experience of New York City's analytical alchemists highlights many of the themes of this book.
- Ultimately, big data marks the moment when the "information society" finally fulfills the promise implied by its name. The data takes center stage.
- It also suggests that we must use this tool with a generous degree of humility . . . and humanity.
- Thomas Bayes. Two years after his death in 1761, a friend presented Baynes's paper entitled "Essay Towards Solving a Problem in the Doctrine of Chances." It introduced what we'd now call "inductive probability." The idea is that we continually update our beliefs about something as new data arrives.
- The frequentists believe in a set truth discerned from a very large number of trials. The Bayesians believe the same phenomenon can be understood in an ever-improved way with new information; truth for them is a continuing process rather than a fixed state.
- We live in a Bayesian world that demands binary decisions.
- For the rest of us, big data is a reminder of the sublime complexity of the world. The great development of science and the Enlightenment was to take the chaos of the universe, or apparent patterns of the divine, and reduce it to rules knowable by the human mind. Big data is another step in humankind's desire to understand and explain. Yet here, the new knowledge is that the level of certainty we assign to what we know is itself always changing.
